security: add doc for password management (#11450)
pingcap/docs: password-management.md

---
title: TiDB Password Management
summary: Learn the mechanism of user password management in TiDB.
---

# TiDB Password Management

To protect the security of user passwords, TiDB supports the following password management policies starting from v6.5.0:

- Password complexity policy: require users to set strong passwords to prevent empty and weak passwords.
- Password expiration policy: require users to change their passwords periodically.
- Password reuse policy: prevent users from reusing old passwords.
- Failed-login tracking and temporary account locking policy: temporarily lock a user account to prevent the same user from trying to log in after multiple login failures caused by wrong passwords.

## TiDB authentication credential storage

> To ensure the authenticity of user identify, TiDB uses passwords as credentials to authenticate users when they log in to the TiDB server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure the authenticity of user identity, TiDB uses passwords as credentials to authenticate users when they log in to the TiDB server.
```

The *password* described in this document refers to the internal credentials generated, stored, and verified by TiDB. TiDB stores user passwords in the `mysql.user` system table.

> The following authentication plugin is related to TiDB password management:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following authentication plugins are related to TiDB password management:
```

- `mysql_native_password`
- `caching_sha2_password`
- `tidb_sm3_password`

For more information about TiDB authentication plugins, see [Authentication plugin status](/security-compatibility-with-mysql.md#authentication-plugin-status).

## Password complexity policy

Password complexity check is disabled by default in TiDB. By configuring system variables related to password complexity, you can enable the password complexity check and make sure the user passwords comply with the password complexity policy.

The password complexity policy has the following features:

> - For SQL statements that sets user passwords in plaintext (including `CREATE USER`, `ALTER USER`, and `SET PASSWORD`), TiDB checks the passwords against the password complexity policy. If the password does not meet the requirements, the password is rejected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For SQL statements that set user passwords in plaintext (including `CREATE USER`, `ALTER USER`, and `SET PASSWORD`), TiDB checks the passwords against the password complexity policy. If a password does not meet the requirements, the password is rejected.
```

- You can use the SQL function [`VALIDATE_PASSWORD_STRENGTH()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/encryption-functions.html#function_validate-password-strength) to validate the password strength.

> **Note:**
>

> > - For the `CREATE USER` statement, even if the account is locked upon creation, you must set an acceptable password. Otherwise, when the account is unlocked, this account can log in to TiDB using a password that does not comply with the password complexity policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - For the `CREATE USER` statement, even if you can lock the account upon creation, you must set an acceptable password. Otherwise, when the account is unlocked, this account can log in to TiDB using a password that does not comply with the password complexity policy.
```

> - The modification to the password complexity policy does not affect the passwords that already exist and only affects the newly set passwords.

You can view all system variables related to the password complexity policy by executing the following SQL statement:

```sql
mysql> SHOW VARIABLES LIKE 'validate_password.%';

+--------------------------------------+--------+
| Variable_name                        | Value  |
+--------------------------------------+--------+
| validate_password.check_user_name    | ON     |
| validate_password.dictionary         |        |
| validate_password.enable             | OFF    |
| validate_password.length             | 8      |
| validate_password.mixed_case_count   | 1      |
| validate_password.number_count       | 1      |
| validate_password.policy             | MEDIUM |
| validate_password.special_char_count | 1      |
+--------------------------------------+--------+
8 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

> For the detailed description of each system variable, see [System Variables](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordcheck_user_name-new-in-v650).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a detailed description of each system variable, see [System Variables](/system-variables.md#validate_passwordcheck_user_name-new-in-v650).
```

### Configure password complexity policy

> This section shows the examples of configuring system variables related to the password complexity policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section shows examples of configuring system variables related to the password complexity policy.
```

Enable the password complexity check:

```sql
SET GLOBAL validate_password.enable = ON;
```

Do not allow users to use a password that is the same as the user name:

```sql
SET GLOBAL validate_password.check_user_name = ON;
```

Set the password complexity level to `LOW`:

```sql
SET GLOBAL validate_password.policy = LOW;
```

Set the minimum password length to `10`:

```sql
SET GLOBAL validate_password.length = 10;
```

> Require the password to contain at least two numbers, one uppercase letter, one lowercase letter, and one special character:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Require a password to contain at least two numbers, one uppercase letter, one lowercase letter, and one special character:
```

```sql
SET GLOBAL validate_password.number_count = 2;
SET GLOBAL validate_password.mixed_case_count = 1;
SET GLOBAL validate_password.special_char_count = 1;
```

> Enable the dictionary check that requires the password to not contain words like `mysql` or `abcd`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enable the dictionary check that prevents a password from containing words like `mysql` or `abcd`:
```

```sql
SET GLOBAL validate_password.dictionary = 'mysql;abcd';
```

> **Note:**
>

> > - The value of `validate_password.dictionary` is a string not longer than 1024. It contains a list of words that must not exist in the password. Each word is separated by semicolon (`;`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - The value of `validate_password.dictionary` is a string, no longer than 1024 characters. It contains a list of words that must not exist in the password. Each word is separated by semicolon (`;`).
```

+----------------------------------------------+
| VALIDATE_PASSWORD_STRENGTH('lessweak$_@123') |
+----------------------------------------------+
|                                           50 |
+----------------------------------------------+
1 row in set (0.01 sec)

mysql> SELECT VALIDATE_PASSWORD_STRENGTH('N0Tweak$_@123!');
+----------------------------------------------+
| VALIDATE_PASSWORD_STRENGTH('N0Tweak$_@123!') |
+----------------------------------------------+
|                                          100 |
+----------------------------------------------+
1 row in set (0.01 sec)
```

## Password expiration policy

TiDB supports configuring a password expiration policy so that users must change their passwords periodically to improve password security. You can manually make account passwords expire or establish a policy for automatic password expiration.

The automatic password expiration policy can be set at the global level and at the account level. As a database administrator, you can establish an automatic password expiration policy at the global level, and also use an account-level policy to override the global policy.

> The privileges for setting the password expiration policy is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The privileges for setting the password expiration policy are as follows:
```

    ```sql
    SET GLOBAL default_password_lifetime = 180;
    ```

- The account level

    To establish an automatic password expiration policy for an individual account, use the `PASSWORD EXPIRE` option in the `CREATE USER` or `ALTER USER` statement.

    The following examples require that the user password is changed every 90 days:

    ```sql
    CREATE USER 'test'@'localhost' PASSWORD EXPIRE INTERVAL 90 DAY;
    ALTER USER 'test'@'localhost' PASSWORD EXPIRE INTERVAL 90 DAY;
    ```

    The following examples disable the automatic password expiration policy for an individual account:

    ```sql
    CREATE USER 'test'@'localhost' PASSWORD EXPIRE NEVER;
    ALTER USER 'test'@'localhost' PASSWORD EXPIRE NEVER;
    ```

    Remove the account-level automatic password expiration policy for a specified account so that it follows the global automatic password expiration policy:

    ```sql
    CREATE USER 'test'@'localhost' PASSWORD EXPIRE DEFAULT;
    ALTER USER 'test'@'localhost' PASSWORD EXPIRE DEFAULT;
    ```

### Password expiration check mechanism

When a client connects to the TiDB server, the server checks whether the password is expired in the following order:

> 1. The server checks whether the password has been set expired manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The server checks whether the password has been set as expired manually.
```

> - Failed-login means that the client fails to provide the correct password during the connection attempt, and does not include connection failures due to unknown users or network issues.
> - When you enable the failed-login tracking and temporary account locking for an account, the account is subject to additional checks when the account attempts to log in. This affects the performance of the login operation, especially in high-concurrency login scenarios.

### Configure the login failure tracking policy

You can configure the number of failed login attempts and the lock time for each account by using the `FAILED_LOGIN_ATTEMPTS` and `PASSWORD_LOCK_TIME` options in the `CREATE USER` or `ALTER USER` statement. The available value options are as follows:

- `FAILED_LOGIN_ATTEMPTS`: N. The account is temporarily locked after `N` consecutive login failures. The value of N ranges from 0 to 32767.
- `PASSWORD_LOCK_TIME`: N | UNBOUNDED.
    - N means that the account will be temporarily locked for `N` days after consecutive failed login attempts. The value of N ranges from 0 to 32767.

>     - `UNBOUNDED` means that the lock time is unlimited, and the account must be manually unlocked. The value of N ranges from 0 to 32767.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `UNBOUNDED` means that the lock time is unlimited and the account must be manually unlocked. The value of N ranges from 0 to 32767.
```
